# hello-world

A "hello world" TypeScript program compiled directly with the TypeScript compiler: `tsc`.


## Overview

This is a "hello world"-style TypeScript program that we build with `tsc` and then run with Node.js. [`tsc` is the
TypeScript compiler](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/basic-types.html#tsc-the-typescript-compiler). It
compiles TypeScript source code into JavaScript code. After the compilation phase, we execute the JavaScript code with
Node.js.

Most TypeScript and JavaScript codebases have a `package.json` file, but this one does not. A `package.json` file and
the [`npm` CLI](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm) are used together to define and run tasks like "download the project
dependencies", "compile the source code", and "run the tests". In this project, we opt for a leaner approach to keep
the focus on the essence of TypeScript.

Specifically, this project invokes `tsc` directly to compile the TypeScript source code into JavaScript. In "hello world"-style
programs in other languages, you might similarly use the compiler directly. For example, in Java you would use `javac`
and in Rust in you would use `rustc`. By using the compiler directly, you can get an unobstructed view of the compiler's
output which can be surprisingly diverse across programming languages:

* Rust code is compiled into an *executable binary*
  * An executable binary is specific to a particular computer architecture, like x86 or ARM. That's about as low level
    as you can get.
* Java code is compiled into *JVM bytecode*
  * JVM bytecode is a lower-level abstract instruction set for the Java runtime. JVM bytecode is much lower-level than
    Java source code but it's high enough level that it is portable to multiple computer architectures.
* TypeScript is compiled into *JavaScript*
  * JavaScript and TypeScript are both high level programming languages. The compiled JavaScript code is much less
    readable though than the TypeScript source code because it was generated by a computer.

Ironically, even though we're not using `npm` to build the project we do need `npm` to install the TypeScript compiler.
See the [installation options described in the official docs](https://www.typescriptlang.org/download). I installed
`tsc` globally with:

```shell
npm install -g typescript
```


## Instructions

Follow these instructions to build and run the program.

1. Pre-requisite `tsc`
   * I used version 5.3.2
2. Pre-requisite: Node.js
    * I used version 20.9.0
3. Compile the TypeScript source code into JavaScript
   * ```shell
     tsc hello-world.ts
     ```
   * `tsc` will compile `hello-world.ts` into `hello-world.js`. Read the contents of that file and compare it with
     the contents of the TypeScript source code. 
4. Run the JavaScript program
   * ```shell
     node hello-world.js
     ```
   * The output will look like this:
     ```text
     This is a story about animals in the forest...
     
     A bear was found in the forest.
     A owl was found in the forest.
     A elk was found in the forest.
     
     The end.
     ```
